.TH mmlib 7 "Jan 27 / 2021" "mmlib 0.1.0" "mmlib Manual Pages"
.SH NAME
mmlib - Marco's accumulated C libraries
.
.
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#define MM_IMPLEMENT" "         /* See NOTES */"
.sp
.B #include <stringify.h>
.B #include <fast_fail.h>
.B #include <mm_err.h>
.B #include <list.h>
.B #include <vector.h>
.B #include <heap.h>
.B #include <map.h>
.B #include <graph.h>
.B #include <tatham_coroutine.h>
.B #include <http_parse.h>
.B #include <websock.h>
.fi
.
.
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This project started when I discovered Sean Barrett's "stb" libraries. Of 
course, I don't think I'm somehow better than Sean Barrett; I just 
wanted to write libraries for the fun of it. 
.sp
.
The following table summarizes what each header provides:
.
.
.SS Rationale
These "mmlib" libraries were originally created to provide vector and map 
types, but I had other C code laying around and decided to clean it up and
include it here too.
.sp
.
This particular set of libraries wants to be:
.
.TP 
.B Hassle-free:
Compiling code that uses mmlib should be just as easy as using the C standard
library. I adopt the single-file library approach learned from Sean Barrett.
.sp
.
Another aspect of being hassle-free is providing a good API. A user shouldn't
have to create "incidental objects" and call three functions where a just a
simple single function call would suffice
.RB ( cough " Windows API " cough ).
.TP
.B Elegant:
Any implementation of a function in this library should use a straightforward 
method. The litmus test is whether the method could be understood by a beginner 
programmer in under 10 minutes. I am always willing to give up performance for 
a simpler implementation; it just so happens that simpler is usually just as 
performant. There is always an ongoing effort to simplify the code (and I am 
nowhere near finished!)
.TP
.B Dependency-free:
mmlib headers should depend only on the standard library or other mmlib headers.
As of January 27th 2021, the only external dependency is on the SHA1 function 
from OpenSSL; I want to get rid of this as soon as possible.
.TP
.B Documented with man pages:
I love man pages. Need I say more?
.TP 
.B Free of global state:
This whole library has only one global variable: MM_SUCCESS (see
.BR mm_err (3)). 
Its existence gives me conniptions, but I haven't found a good way around it yet.
.
.
.
.
.SH NOTES
.
.
.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vector (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Marco Merlini (mahkoe@gmail.com)
