.hw VECTOR_DECL
.TH vector 3 "Jan 27 / 2021" "mmlib vector 0.1.0" "mmlib Manual Pages"
.SH NAME
vector - dynamic arrays for C programs
.
.
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#define MM_IMPLEMENT" "         /* See mmlib(7) */"
.B #include <vector.h>
.sp
.BI VECTOR_DECL( type ", " name );
.sp
.BI vector_init( vec );
.BI vector_free( vec );
.sp
.BI VECTOR_PTR_PARAM( type ", " name );
.BI VECTOR_ARG( vec );
.sp
.BI vector_extend_if_full( vec );
.BI vector_reserve( vec ", " size );
.BI vector_shrink_to_fit( vec );
.sp
.BI vector_push( vec ", " elem );
.IB type " *" new_slot " = vector_lengthen(" vec );
.sp
.IB vec [ index ]
.BI (* vec " + " index )
.IB somestruct -> vec [ index ]
.IB type " *" back " = vector_back_ptr(" vec );
.sp
.I  vec_len
.IB somestruct -> vec_len
.sp
.BI vector_pop( vec );
.BI vector_clear( vec );
.fi
.
.
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Emulates the convenience of C++'s
.B std::vector<T>
for regular C code. Items can be added/removed from a vector, and the underlying
memory will be
.BR realloc (3)'ed
if necessary. The traditional size-doubling method is used.
.
.
.SS Declaring a vector
.BI VECTOR_DECL( type ", " name )
declares, but does not initialize, a dynamic array
.I name
of type
.IR type .
This macro can be used in a function or in a 
.B struct 
definition. The "vector" itself is a pointer to memory allocated by 
.BR malloc (3)
alongside some bookkeeping (see 
.BR NOTES )
and thus only occupies about 16 bytes.
.
.
.SS Initializing and freeing vectors
The 
.BI vector_init( vec )
macro initializes the vector named
.IR vec .
.I vec
is any l-value previously declared with 
.BR VECTOR_DECL . 
Calling 
.B vector_init
a second time on 
.I vec
will leak the memory it originally pointed to. 
.sp
.
The 
.BI vector_free( vec )
macro will 
.BR free (3)
the memory held by
.IR vec . vec
is any l-value previously declared with 
.BR VECTOR_DECL ". If"
.I vec
is a vector of pointers to allocated memory, 
.B vector_free
will NOT free the memory that its elements point to.
.
.
.SS Passing vectors to functions
The 
.BI VECTOR_PTR_PARAM( type ", " name )
macro can be used in a function parameter list to declare a vector passed in by
reference. Its arguments are the same as for
.BR VECTOR_DECL .
Within the function, use
.BI (* name )
to dereference the vector; this expression will work with any of the functions 
or expressions shown in the 
.BR SYNOPSIS . 
.sp
.
Use 
.BI VECTOR_ARG( vec )
to pass the vector named 
.I vec
to a function needing a 
.BR VECTOR_PTR_PARAM . 
See the 
.B EXAMPLES
section for more information.
.
.
.SS Changing vector capacity
.BI vector_extend_if_full( vec )
checks if 
.IR vec 's
length is equal to its capacity. If so, the capacity is doubled.
.sp
.
.BI vector_reserve( vec ", " size )
guarantees 
.IR vec 's
capacity is large enough to hold
.I size
elements. The vector may be grown, but will not be shrunk.
.sp
.
.BI vector_shrink_to_fit( vec )
will reallocate
.I vec
such that its capacity is exactly equal to its length.
.
.
.SS Adding elements to vectors
.BI vector_push( vec ", " elem )
increases
.IR vec 's
length by 1 (reallocating if necessary) and appends a copy of elem to the end.
.sp
.
.BI vector_lengthen( vec )
increases 
.IR vec 's
length by 1 (reallocating if necessary) and returns a pointer to the new slot,
which is at the end of the vector. The memory will not be initialized.
.
.
.SS Accessing vector elements
A vector can be accessed as if it was a regular C array by using square 
brackets (
.IB vec [ index ]
) or by treating it as a pointer (
.IB vec " + " index
). This also works if 
.I vec
is in a 
.BR struct,
as in
.IB somestruct -> vec [ index 
.BR ] .
.sp
.
.BI vector_back_ptr( vec )
returns a pointer to the last element of
.IR vec .
If 
.I vec
is empty, the behaviour is undefined.
.
.
.SS Finding the length of a vector
Anywhere a vector
.I vec
is declared, a variable with with the name
.I vec_len
is also declared. The functions in this library will maintain
.I vec_len
at all times such that it holds the number of items in 
.I vec
(i.e. NOT the number of bytes). Please see the 
.B NOTES
section for more details.
.
.
.SS Removing elements from a vector
.BI vector_pop( vec )
will decrease 
.IR vec 's
length by 1. The capacity is not changed, and the element that was "removed" is
neither freed nor cleared.
.sp
.
.BI vector_clear( vec )
will set
.IR vec 's
length to 0. The capacity is not changed, and the element that was "removed" is
neither freed nor cleared.
.
.
.
.
.SH NOTES
If a vector allocation/reallocation fails,
.B SIGABRT
will be raised.
.sp
.
Unlike plain C arrays, 
.BI sizeof( vec )
will always return the size of a 
.B void*
on your machine. 
.sp
.
The
.BI VECTOR_DECL( type ", " name )
macro creates three variables: 
.TP 
.IR name ,
of type 
.RI pointer-to- type ". Elements of the array can thus be accesed through"
.I name
as if it were the pointer to the beginning of an ordinary C array. No 
bounds-checking is performed.
.
.TP
.IR name_len ,
of type 
.IR unsigned ". This"
variable holds the current number of elements inside the vector. 
.
.TP
.IR name_cap ,
of type 
.IR unsigned ". This"
variable holds the total capacity of the vector's underlying memory (measured as
the number of items of type 
.I type
it could hold).
.
.PP
The 
.BI VECTOR_PTR_PARAM( type ", " name )
macro expands to three parameters: 
.IR "type **name" ", " "unsigned *name_len" ", and " "unsigned *name_cap" .
Likewise, the
.B VECTOR_ARG
macro expands out to three arguments: pointers to the original three variables
created by
.BR VECTOR_DECL .
.
.
.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following example demonstrates ways to use the vector library. The program
accepts a list of strings from 
.B STDIN
until an
.BR EOF " (" CTRL-D )
is encountered. The strings are sorted, printed, and a tally of bytes is 
displayed.
.
.
.SS Read a list of strings, sort, and print
.EX
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>

#define MM_IMPLEMENT
#include <vector.h>

//For sorting a vector of strings
int deref_strcmp(void const *a, void const *b) {
	char * const *lhs = (char * const *) a;
	char * const *rhs = (char * const *) b;
	
	return strcmp(*lhs, *rhs);
}

//Counts the bytes in a vector of strings (including NULs).
int count_bytes(VECTOR_PTR_PARAM(char *, strs)) {
	int count = 0;
	
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < *strs_len; i++) {
		count += strlen((*strs)[i]) + 1; //+1 for NUL
	}
	
	return count;
}

//Prints all the strings in a vector, then the total number
//of bytes.
void print_strvec(VECTOR_PTR_PARAM(char *, strs)) {
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < *strs_len; i++) {
		printf("%s", (*strs)[i]);
	}
	
	//Notice that we pass *strs to VECTOR_ARG instead of strs.
	int num_bytes = count_bytes(VECTOR_ARG(*strs));
	printf("\\nTotal bytes: %d\\n", num_bytes);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
	//Declare and initialize a vector of strings
	VECTOR_DECL(char *, strs);
	vector_init(strs);
	
	//Read lines from stdin until EOF
	while(1) {
		char *line = malloc(128);
		char *ret = fgets(line, 128, stdin);
		if (ret == NULL) {
			free(line);
			break;
		}
		
		vector_push(strs, line);
		
		//Could have also used:
		//
		//char **back = vector_lengthen(strs);
		//*back = line;
	}
	
	//Sort the char*s in the vector
	qsort(strs, strs_len, sizeof(char*), deref_strcmp);
	
	//Print the sorted vector
	puts("\\nSorted:");
	puts("-------");
	print_strvec(VECTOR_ARG(strs));
	
	//Release the memory
	int i;
	for (i = 0; i < strs_len; i++) free(strs[i]);
	vector_free(strs);
	
	return 0;
}
.EE
.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mmlib (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Marco Merlini (mahkoe@gmail.com)
